

Politifact Thisthenewarticlestart
Sorting out fact from fiction in the Florida recounts
 By Kyra Haas, Amy Sherman on Wednesday, November 14th, 2018 at 5:58 p.m. 
time is
Florida’s midterm recount has both parties furiously filing litigation, making the rounds on national TV, firing off attacks on Twitter and pleading for donations to fund their fights for U.S. Senate and the governor’s mansion.
Practically everyone seems mad at Broward Supervisor of Elections Brenda Snipes, who has been accused of corruption or incompetence as her county tabulated ballots slower than nearly every other county in the state.
The fast-moving situation creates an atmosphere rife for misinformation. PolitiFact is here to help voters sort out the facts from fiction.
Gov. Rick Scott and President Donald Trump have alleged fraud in the ballot counting in Broward County, a liberal bastion. The issue is important to Scott, whose political future hangs on a narrow lead of thousands of votes over incumbent Sen. Bill Nelson.
Neither Republican provided any evidence of fraud. While Broward has a history of lawsuits and voting problems, that isn’t the same as fraud.
The Florida Department of Law Enforcement said it had received no allegation of fraud and the state Division of Elections said with respect to Broward "our staff has seen no evidence of criminal activity at this time." The state's election office had been monitoring Broward’s elections due to an unrelated lawsuit about prematurely destroyed ballots that Snipes lost after the 2016 election.
State election officials have alerted federal prosecutors to possible election law violations. So far, the state appears to be raising questions about the Florida Democratic Party, not county elections officials.
Politico reported that on Nov. 9, the state Division of Elections sent a letter to federal prosecutors related to a form intended to serve as an affidavit to cure defects in vote-by-mail. While Florida law says that voters must return the forms on the day before the election, supervisors in at least four counties including Broward received altered forms wrongly directing the voter to return the form by Nov. 8. A chain of emails between supervisors and the state indicated that the information about the wrong date appeared to come from the Florida Democratic Party. A party spokeswoman couldn’t be reached by PolitiFact.
Scott said on Fox News that a Nelson lawyer "said that a non-citizen should have the right to vote."
A Trump campaign fundraising email made an even bolder claim, saying that Democrats in Florida "fought to include votes from people who ARE NOT EVEN UNITED STATES CITIZENS."
This statement requires context; mainly, it pertains to comment about a single voter.
The Scott campaign sent a few lines of a transcript of the board meeting in which Susan Bucher, the Palm Beach elections supervisor, said a ballot was not counted because the person was "not a U.S. citizen." Lawyer Jack Scarola said "objection Nelson" followed by a similar objection by a lawyer for Gillum.
Scarola, a volunteer lawyer for Nelson, told us his objection was a joke.
"Everybody present recognized the fact there was no legal basis for raising an objection to a non-citizen casting a ballot," Scarola said in an interview. "We had been there for hours, raising many objections based upon a variety of other issues and this objection was raised and understood by the canvassing board and everyone present to have been raised in humor."
Scarola said in another instance, the board rejected an unsigned ballot by a voter whose last name was DeSantis, the same name as GOP candidate for governor Ron DeSantis. Scarola said he "raised a non-objection" — another joke.
Nelson's lead recount attorney, Marc Elias, said in a statement to the media that the lawyer at the meeting was "not someone we had authorized to make such an objection. Non-citizens cannot vote in U.S. elections."
Votes cast by non-citizens are statistically rare.
It is not in dispute that there were about 25,000 fewer votes for Senate than governor in Broward County. But there is not a definitive answer as to why this occurred. Voters are allowed to skip any races they want on the ballot. But it is odd that Broward stands out here.
Nelson’s attorney suggested it could have been an issue with voting machines.
"The scanning equipment may not have caught it," Elias said.
But most of the theories relate to the ballot design in Broward, raising questions about whether some voters simply missed it. The Senate race question was placed in the same vertical column as the long list of voter instructions.
The U.S. Election Assistance Commission recommends ballot instructions be "self-contained and separated from contest data."
The guidelines continue, "Vertical instruction treatments cannot share column space with contests," noting that test voters often overlooked races listed under vertical instructions.
Democratic consultant Matthew Isbell found that 3.7 percent of Senate ballot questions were left blank in Broward, "shattering any other county’s undervote."
"My theory is that the lack of a congressional race meant there was one less opportunity to spot that races existed on the bottom left," Isbell wrote.
Scott and Trump have raised questions about why tens of thousands of votes showed up after Election Day.
The Tampa Bay Times found that Nelson’s vote total between 11 p.m. on election night and the following Friday rose by 93,475.
But it’s not a mystery. In the days following an election, vote totals normally go up. The Senate race’s post-Election Day ballot count garnered particular attention because the totals were close as Scott’s lead dwindled to about 13,000, prompting a recount.
Florida law allows until noon the Saturday after the election for ballots to be counted, and votes counted after the election were cast for both Nelson and Scott.
The Broward County elections supervisor is a lifelong Democrat. Her biography on the Broward County supervisor of elections website also lists her as a Democrat. Numerous media reports and government documents confirm her Democratic party affiliation.
The party confusion probably stems from her 2003 appointment to the office by then-Gov. Jeb Bush, a Republican. Bush has now called for her to be removed from office following the recounts.
No. Claims that there were more ballots cast than the number of registered voters are not supported by any evidence. Voter turnout in Broward County was about 61 percent, not 110 percent as some social media users claimed.
There have been 714,859 votes counted in Broward County so far, not more than 1.2 million.
 

Politifact Thisthenewarticlestart
Broward County elections supervisor Brenda Snipes is a Democrat, not a Republican
 By John Kruzel on Wednesday, November 14th, 2018 at 11:29 a.m.
time is
Broward County supervisor of elections Brenda Snipes has found herself at the center of the election recount in Florida, where three statewide races remain undecided more than a week after Election Day.
As the high-stakes recount has proceeded, Snipes has been maligned as a Democratic partisan who’s working to hand the election to her party.
There’s no evidence of voter fraud or criminal activity. And according to NBC’s Andrea Mitchell, the notion that Snipes is trying to engineer a victory for Democrats is even more off-base because, as Mitchell claimed, Snipes is a Republican.
"We should also point out that Brenda Snipes in Broward County is a Republican appointed by former governor, then-Gov. Jeb Bush," Mitchell said Nov. 12. "So she was put in by a Republican governor after the mess that we all remember from 2000. And she’s hardly a Democratic official, or someone doing the bidding of the Democratic candidates there."
Mitchell is wrong about Snipes’ party affiliation: She’s a Democrat. But, again, it’s important to note we’ve seen no evidence Snipes has done anything untoward on her party’s behalf during the Florida recount.
Mitchell is apparently not the only person confused about Snipes’ political affiliation.
In an interview with CNN, Snipes said she recently corrected someone who mistakenly believed she was a Republican:
"I was talking with a woman today, as she came into our office, and she made some statement — a partisan statement — and she said, ‘I know that you’re a Republican.’ I said, ‘I have been a Democrat all my life.’ In this position, I have been very focused on party, because I want to treat all of the voters in Broward County the same. And I think if you’d ask the voters, I have that reputation."
At look at Snipes’ biography on the Broward County supervisor of elections website also lists her as a Democrat.

Countless media reports also refer to Snipes’ Democratic affiliation. To take just one example, here’s an article from the South Florida Sun Sentinel about Snipes’ 2016 re-election bid, which references her party affiliation.
"Snipes, a Democrat, was appointed by then-Gov. Jeb Bush in 2003, after he removed her predecessor Miriam Oliphant," the 2015 article reads. "Snipes went on to win three elections."
Snipes went on to win the 2016 Democratic primary by a whopping 53 percentage points.
PolitiFact also referenced Snipes’ Democratic affiliation in a fact-check we wrote during the 2016 presidential election.
We attempted to reach Mitchell through a press contact for her NBC show but did not hear back.
Mitchell said Snipes is a Republican.
That’s wrong. Snipes describes herself as a lifelong Democrat, and references in government documents and countless media reports back up this affiliation.
We rate this False.
 

Pro Publica Thisthenewarticlestart
What Oregon Officials Knew and When They Knew It
Members of the Psychiatric Security Review Board have said it is not their duty to track what happens to people they set free. But in private, board members and staff pushed to study recidivism and found high rates among people the board frees. 
Nov. 14, 5 a.m. EST
Repeat Attacks After Pleading Insanity 
This article was produced in partnership with the Malheur Enterprise, which is a member of the ProPublica Local Reporting Network.
The top of the Oregon Psychiatric Security Review Board’s website boasts of its success in reforming people acquitted of crimes because of a mental disorder: “With public safety as its primary focus, the Board has an exceptional record of reintegrating clients into the community with a 6 year average 0.46% adult recidivism rate.”
In fact, a review of public records shows that the board has known that its record with clients after they are released is far less impressive. The 0.46 percent rate of recidivism refers only to people still in the board’s custody.
Get ProPublica’s Daily&nbsp;Digest.
Board members have said it is not their duty to track what happens to people they set free.
“While any recidivism by any former client is concerning, our agency’s responsibility is to the clients under our jurisdiction,” board officials said in a statement on Oct. 5, 2018.
But in private, board members and staff pushed to study recidivism and found far higher rates among people the board releases. This timeline traces what board officials knew about a crucial issue of public safety and when they knew it.
On Sept. 30, the board unanimously voted to free Charles Longjaw, despite warnings from a state psychologist that he was likely to resume his abuse of alcohol and drugs if the board released him from strict supervision. She said that once drunk or high, Longjaw would be unable to restrain impulses that had previously led to a brutal murder, an attempted murder and a vicious rape.
Juliet Britton, executive director of the board from 2013 to 2018, began pushing for a study of recidivism among people discharged from board custody. Available records show she broached the idea as early as Jan. 4, 2016, in an email chain with the agency’s data analyst and three researchers she planned to join at an upcoming national conference. Britton’s email referred to Dr. Simrat Sethi, a psychiatrist who was then leading the Forensic Evaluation Service at the Oregon State Hospital.
“I think we would want to emphasize new data about outcomes, recidivism and rehabilitation, as well as ideas for a future research agenda,” wrote a state mental health official from Connecticut.
Britton replied, “I, along with Dr. Sethi (Oregon State Hospital) are very interested in this topic.”
The idea gained momentum when Britton spotted a Google Alert about a study of recidivism by defendants set free by Connecticut’s Psychiatric Security Review Board. She forwarded the email to Sethi with a short note: “We should do this.”
A few days later, Britton told a data analyst to start tracking former PSRB clients whose names appeared in the news after being charged with new crimes.
On May 31, 2016, Britton and the analyst drafted a request to the Oregon State Police for access to a database of arrests, a more scientifically sound way of calculating recidivism. The information, they wrote, was needed “to carry out PSRB’s legislative responsibilities.”
Through the summer, Britton talked with two independent researchers — Dr. Joseph Bloom and Dr. Wil Berry — about study ideas. Berry was particularly interested in looking at gaps in Oregon’s civil commitment process. Britton pushed to study criminal recidivism instead.
Britton and the analyst worked to gain access to state data that would allow them to study recidivism by clients released from oversight.
A copy of the board’s agreement with the state police made clear what officials were planning to do. The study was intended to “evaluate the program’s efficiency, rate of success or failure in comparison with other programs such as the parole and probation system in Oregon and the insanity programs in other states around the county.
“This evaluation can help with program development to improve the success of these individuals after their term ends. The PSRB intends to research recidivism of former clients on an ongoing basis and compile aggregate data (no personal or confidential data tied to specific individuals) for reporting purposes.”
Britton and the data analyst contacted the Oregon Health Authority in hopes of reviewing data that would reveal how many people freed by the board continued to receive treatment in community-based health programs and how many were civilly committed.
Sethi sent Britton, the analyst and Assistant Executive Director Sid Moore a link to a Sept. 30, 2016, story in the Salem Statesman Journal about a man freed by the board being convicted in a rape case.
That same day, Britton asked board member Elena Balduzzi, a psychologist, if Berry and Bloom could join their recidivism study.
On Nov. 20, Longjaw plunged a knife into the stomach and arm of a homeless man as they argued on a downtown Portland sidewalk. He walked away after the attack, leaving the man mortally wounded.
Separately, Britton emailed Balduzzi, Berry, Bloom and Sethi on Nov. 29 with a summary of how many people were freed in 1996, 2001, 2006 and 2011, as well as the reason they were discharged.
“I like the idea that for this paper, we keep it real simple: were they re-arrested and did they access mental health services or were (they) civilly committed,” she wrote.
The board met on Dec. 7 to consider discharging Anthony Montwheeler. Doctors said they were persuaded that he had been faking illness for nearly 20 years to avoid prison, saying he was not suffering from any of the mental illnesses specified by Oregon insanity law. Doctors warned the board that Montwheeler posed a danger to family and close associates. The board ruled it had no grounds to hold Montwheeler, and so it set him free.
On Dec. 19, Britton sent emails to board members and staff alerting them to a news story about Longjaw’s arrest. She asked the analyst to add his case to the list of clients who committed new crimes after their release and said she would handle any media calls.
In an email on Dec. 28, Britton said she wanted to introduce a formal process for tracking what happens to people after they are freed.
“I want to sit down and talk about how we as an agency want to start tracking recidivism post-psrb,’’ she wrote. “This is separate from the paper.
“I would at least like to have some data soon about re-arrest …” Britton wrote. “I want to have this data going into the legislative session.”
On Jan. 9, prosecutors say, Montwheeler kidnapped Annita Harmon, one of his ex-wives, and stabbed her to death at a gas station. A clerk who witnessed the attack called the police, who then chased Montwheeler’s pickup truck down Oregon Highway 201. Authorities say Montwheeler swerved into the oncoming lane and collided head-on with an SUV, killing David Bates and seriously injuring his wife, Jessica. Harmon was a mother of two children; Bates was a father of five.
Britton lamented the arrests of Longjaw and Montwheeler in a Jan. 30 email to Bloom and Berry. The board was looking for ways to prevent such outcomes in the future.
“Sadly, we have had three deaths as a result of two discharged clients in the last month (both were early discharges for no mental illness),’’ Britton wrote. “There is some talk to close that gap but I have not seen anything yet.”
She suggested that Bloom and Berry do an online search for “Reynaldo Rios Aloha, Oregon.” KATU, a Portland TV station, had reported how Rios, who was found guilty except for insanity in the rape of a 6-year-old girl, had been freed by the board after 32 years but did not appear on the state’s sex offender registry.
On March 14, Britton emailed Balduzzi, Sethi, Bloom, Berry and Ashley Wilsey, a member of the board’s staff, in an effort to get the recidivism study back on track. She noted that the board had secured the data agreements with the Oregon State Police and Oregon Health Authority needed to do the analysis.
In his reply email, Sethi told Britton she was on the right track.
“I like these data points, too. I think since it’s the first study, we should just study re-arrest and look at characteristics you mention,” he said.
On March 22, responding to written questions from the Malheur Enterprise, Britton wrote: “We do not track recidivism of persons who have been discharged (released) from PSRB jurisdiction.” She made no mention of the planned study.
Britton directed two staff members to start researching recidivism based on data that Balduzzi had “sent out last week.’’
“Priority is to document new arrests and those outcomes, if any.”
Britton shared initial recidivism findings in an email to Balduzzi, Bloom and Berry. They were much higher than 0.46 percent rate cited on the website — 41 percent for people freed in 2011, 53 percent in 2006 and 32 percent in 2001.
Britton wrote that she hoped to have a draft of the study done by the end of the year.
Britton left the top job at the Psychiatric Security Review Board to become a municipal judge in Beaverton. In emails to her old staff and an independent researcher, she said she wanted to complete the recidivism study.
“I’m interested in continuing to write papers and study but don’t want to commit until I get into the new job and see the workload,” she wrote. Later, she added, “I think the agency should continue with it. I don’t mind consulting if you all want me to stay on as an author.”
In one of her last emails at the agency, Britton told staff members and the spokesperson at the Oregon State Hospital about upcoming interviews with reporters and blamed a small staff on the failure to start a recidivism study.
“Jayme Fraser from Malheur Enterprise as well as Michael Ollove [a reporter for the online news site Stateline] will be visiting Portland soon and are learning about how PSRB works and attending hearings. I interviewed with Mike this morning and gave a systems overview. It went well — the typical 101 questions. Jayme requested all 300 Discharge Orders over the last five years — I anticipate an investigative story about how ex PSRB clients fare after supervision,” she wrote. “Coincidentally, we are trying to get a research paper off the ground that would study recidivism post PSRB. The usual barriers — not enough staff for a big research project.”
Ollove told the Enterprise and ProPublica that he had asked the board for statistics about post-discharge recidivism for his story about Oregon’s criminal insanity model.
“They said they didn’t have them,” he wrote in a recent email.
I interviewed Moore, who was then the interim director, several times in person and by phone about the board’s duties. He defended the board’s work and said the Longjaw and Montwheeler cases were not part of a larger trend.
“We’re not perfect, but by and large we do a very good job. Our recidivism rate is very, very low,” he said. Later, he added: “Are we perfect? No. Are we very, very good? Yeah, we actually are. … Our success rate is very close to 100 percent, but it’s not 100 percent. We’re going to do what we can to get closer. That’s all we can do.”
He said that the board did not view itself as responsible for tracking clients post-discharge since it was not specifically required under state law.
Moore also downplayed how often people freed by the board later commit serious crimes.
“The good news is, and it’s not a comfort to victims, but people who are discharged and commit egregious crimes — it’s rare,” he said. “We do everything we can to keep the public safe.”
On March 7, a Multnomah County jury convicted Longjaw of murder for the 2016 stabbing. He was sentenced to life in prison. “This was an incredibly dangerous individual who should not have been out on the streets,” Multnomah Deputy District Attorney Melissa Marrero said later in an interview.
In response to written questions, board members said in a joint statement that they saw no need to review their decision to free Longjaw.
“The decision to discharge Mr. Longjaw was based on the evidence available to it at the time of his hearing and (state law),” they wrote. “Bad — and sometimes serious — outcomes occur in many arenas, even when everything else is done appropriately under applicable law and other guidelines.”
Psychologist and lawyer Alison Bort joined the board as its new executive director. In an interview with the Enterprise, she said the board should care about criminal recidivism but does not have the staff to study it. She also said she didn’t know how often people commit new crimes once freed.
“We don’t have the post-jurisdiction data. That’s the data we really don’t have. That’s really important,” she said. “I love that you’re doing this research project. As a researcher myself, I thought maybe this is something we need to be doing internally at some point.”
Later in the conversation, she acknowledged that Britton “was starting on a project like that.”
“It got put on hold after she left,” Bort said.
The Enterprise shared some preliminary findings from its recidivism research with Bort and asked her to discuss them.
She said her initial reaction was, “Wow, this can look really bad.”
Bort said she heard stories about new crimes when she treated board clients as a community provider, but “there was no statistical analysis.”
She again questioned how the board would track recidivism and suggested it could be illegal to do so.
“It might be civil rights issue to follow up on people who are no longer under our jurisdiction. Is it the business of the board?” she asked. “We’re an 11-person agency. We’re the only one like it. And I think it’s probably a giant resource issue.”
Later that month, the Enterprise emailed Bort with questions about when the board started talking about a recidivism study and how much work had been completed. She did not provide any information about the agency’s initial findings from a year earlier. Instead, she attached a research article co-written by Balduzzi, now the board chairwoman, that counted new crimes committed by people under the board’s supervision.
“As I have mentioned, Juliet (Britton) began to pull together records to embark on a recidivism study, and there are plans to continue this study in the near future,” she wrote.
In a later interview, she said the board saw no need to review its procedures for freeing people.
Bort said there have been no changes in state law or rules that would require such a re-examination. She celebrated the fact that it has been years since anyone appealed a board decision to Oregon courts, which have sometimes reversed its action or told members to reconsider cases. Bort also noted that board members make decisions using “the fact patterns presented to them.”
The Enterprise emailed Britton on Sept. 1, asking for an interview to discuss the recidivism study she started. She did not reply to that message.
On Sept. 4, Bort promised me that she would “get you some information” about the study “within a couple weeks.”
A judge ruled on Sept. 18 that Montwheeler was not competent to stand trial for an assault and two murders that prosecutors say he committed just weeks after he was freed by the board. He was ordered back to the Oregon State Hospital for treatment of depression brought on by the charges against him.
Board members declined, through Bort, to be interviewed about the Enterprise-ProPublica findings but did provide a written statement.
Board members wrote that they interpret state law as requiring them to focus “on persons under its jurisdiction,” not what happens to people they freed.
“The general public would most likely judge the success of the PSRB on our excellent public safety record,” they wrote, specifying the recidivism of people they supervise in the community.
“Once a client is discharged from the Board’s jurisdiction, the Board no longer has any legal recourse to ensure that a client follows through with (a discharge) plan. … This is parallel to what occurs with an individual who is no longer under supervision of a parole and probation agency.”
On Oct. 24, Bort gave the Enterprise a series of internal emails relating to the recidivism study.
“We are about to enter a long legislative session, and plan to revisit how to proceed with this project in summer 2019, pending the results of the legislative session (which may delegate additional duties to the Board that would take precedence),” Bort wrote when sending the records.
On Nov. 2, I sent clarifying questions about the emails to Bort and Britton, which would give them a final opportunity in writing to explain apparent conflicts between earlier statements and what the recently released emails had shown.
Both declined to answer the questions and instead gave me written statements.
In her reply, Bort said the questions “strike me as loaded and conclusive that our agency has been intentionally dishonest.”
“There is not anything that would suggest we are being inconsistent, dishonest or untruthful about our role or about the information we have provided,” she wrote.
Bort also said, “Our agency shares the concerns others have with post-jurisdiction,” but the recidivism study “has been placed on hold until a time when the resources are available to continue with it.” She defended the decision of her predecessor not to release the initial recidivism calculations to the public.
“This data has not been statistically analyzed, and it would not only be irresponsible (and for me as a licensed psychologist, unethical), but potentially harmful for the agency (or any entity) to share it with the public at its current stage,” she wrote.
In her reply, Britton lauded the board’s support of independent research over the years and defended her prior statements as true.
“To my knowledge, the Board has never done its own independent research regarding post-supervision recidivism,” she wrote. “During my time at the PSRB, there was no one on staff who had the education or expertise to do a peer review, statistically valid study on the subject. Traditionally, researchers approach the Board’s Executive Director to study topics and Board staff provide data and contribute to the writing of the paper.”
She noted that a rigorous research study “requires extensive manual review of files, statistical analysis, verification and peer review (PhD and MD credentials).”
Britton said that research was not a primary duty of the “highly complex state agency,” but that she was proud of the staff members who had “dedicated weekends and evenings to these special projects in an effort to shed light on the forensic mental health system.”
Jayme Fraser is a reporter for the Malheur Enterprise. She’s spending the year examining the way states manage people with mental illnesses who commit violent crimes — in Oregon and nationally. Are there problems with the way your state handles people who are violent and have mental illnesses? Email her at jayme@malheurenterprise.com and follow her on Twitter @JaymeKFraser.
Filed under:
 

Pro Publica Thisthenewarticlestart
Chicago City Council Approves Modest First Reforms on Ticketing and Debt
The changes signal a growing acknowledgement that the city’s reliance on fines and fees to generate revenue has come at a significant cost for some residents.
Nov. 14, 5:24 p.m. CST
How Tickets Burden the Poor
This story is a collaboration between ProPublica Illinois and WBEZ.
The Chicago City Council on Wednesday approved the first reforms aimed at helping the city’s low-income motorists cope with ticket debt, with more significant changes potentially on the way.
The approved measures, tucked into Mayor Rahm Emanuel’s final city budget, chip away at a massive problem that has exploded during his tenure: debt and bankruptcies concentrated in black neighborhoods.
In a way, the new policies come full circle, as they seek to undo some of the damage done by a hike in the price of tickets for mandatory vehicle stickers introduced in the mayor’s first budget, in 2011.
Aldermen approved a pilot city sticker program designed to help low-income motorists comply with the municipal requirement and to avoid costly citations that have contributed to a bankruptcy boom in Chicago. City Clerk Anna Valencia proposed the program last month in response to ProPublica Illinois/WBEZ reporting on how a 2011 decision to increase the cost of the city sticker citation led to more debt but not much more revenue for the city.
The council also approved a measure from the city’s Law Department to wipe away some ticket debt for motorists who file for bankruptcy under Chapter 7. The measure seeks to curb the number of Chapter 13 bankruptcies filed here to deal with ticket debt, most of which fail to deliver debt relief.
The changes, while modest, signal a growing acknowledgment that Chicago’s reliance on fines and fees to generate revenue has come at a significant cost for some residents, particularly those from low-income, African-American neighborhoods.
Our newsletter is written by a ProPublica Illinois reporter every week
For more than a year, ProPublica Illinois and WBEZ have been reporting on ticketing disparities and the impact of ticket debt on low-income black communities. Support for reform has grown steadily.
A coalition of nonprofit groups, including Community Organizing and Family Issues, the Chicago Jobs Council and the Woodstock Institute, has led the public call for an overhaul of the city’s ticketing and debt collection system.
In his first public acknowledgement of the problem, Emanuel said he supported efforts to make municipal fines and fees less punishing for the poor.
“Just know that, in this budget, we took steps to address the issue of equity and fairness while upholding, obviously, the law,” the mayor said during a press conference after the budget was approved. “Across the spectrum of fees and fines, we have a way to address and reflect people of different means. And so we’re going to continue to work on that issue.”
Emanuel is not seeking re-election in February. But a number of the candidates running for mayor — and several aldermen — have said the city’s ticketing system needs reform. In recent weeks, aldermen have put forward two separate proposals to change how Chicago goes after people who cannot afford to pay their tickets.
This week, Alderman Ed Burke, the chairman of the powerful Finance Committee, introduced a proposal that would limit the city’s ability to suspend driver’s licenses over unpaid tickets without first considering motorists’ income. That measure is now being studied alongside a proposal from Alderman Gilbert Villegas, of the Northwest Side’s 36th Ward, to drastically cut late penalties and create community service alternatives to debt repayment.
The proposals may be voted on as early as December.
Valencia announced a proposal this week to give city stickers to veterans for free, saying it was to honor Veterans Day. In an interview Wednesday, she said she is glad there is growing momentum on the issue.
“What I am excited about is that there are more people that are looking at this and willing to work with us on this and see what we can develop to create policies that are going to ease the burden on people,” she said. “We understand the importance of [generating revenue to fund] our mentoring programs and our potholes, but also not doing it on the backs of working families.”
Joanna Weiss, co-director of the Fines &amp; Fees Justice Center, a nonprofit advocacy group, described the volume of bankruptcies filed in Chicago over ticket debt as “a crisis” that needs more substantial reform.
“It’s great to see there’s interest, but incremental reforms will only get you so far,” she said. “Making it easy for people to get rid of [their] debt only once they’re in bankruptcy doesn’t seem like a viable, sustainable solution for most people. We need to be able to do better than that.”
Filed under:
 

Pro Publica Thisthenewarticlestart
Century-Old West Virginia Leases Yield Paltry Gas Royalties. A Suit Could Cut Others’ Payouts to a Trickle, Too.
Energy giant EQT is challenging a 36-year-old law that gives residents a bigger share of natural gas profits at a time when the industry is flourishing.
Nov. 14, 5 a.m. EST
West Virginia’s Natural Gas Industry
This article was produced in partnership with the Charleston Gazette-Mail, which is a member of the ProPublica Local Reporting Network.
Linda Stimmell gets upset every time EQT Corp.’s checks arrive in the mail. The energy giant extracts natural gas from beneath the Stimmell family’s old farm in Doddridge County, West Virginia, under the terms of a lease signed when Teddy Roosevelt was president.
The royalty checks Stimmell receives from two “Bates Wells,” named for her great-great-grandfather, Andrew Jackson Bates, amount to just $9 and $3 each quarter.
The lease Bates signed more than a century ago with Carnegie Natural Gas Co. of Pittsburgh allowed legendary industrialist Andrew Carnegie’s company to drill for, produce and sell as much natural gas as Carnegie wanted. In exchange, Bates got a flat fee of $300 a year per well.
Get ProPublica’s Daily&nbsp;Digest.
Because of that deal, Stimmell and the many other Bates descendants who have since inherited the gas — and that 112-year-old lease — have received tens of thousands of dollars less than they would have if the contract were negotiated today.
“They’ve paid pennies, compared to what they are making,” Stimmell said. “It’s ridiculous.”
It’s not clear how many West Virginians are stuck with old leases that pay residents a fraction of what they might otherwise get. Observers guess it’s in the thousands. But what is clear is that thousands more could find themselves getting far less in royalties, if at least one major gas company gets its way.
That’s because of a recent lawsuit filed by EQT — the state’s second-largest gas producer — that threatens to put far more people in Linda Stimmell’s situation, stuck with tiny monthly payments at a time when the natural gas industry is booming.
The lawsuit, filed in April, challenges a 1982 law that aimed to give gas owners a bigger share of the profits. That law applied to situations where the gas lease was an old flat-fee arrangement and the well was drilled after the law took effect. In order to get a state permit for such wells, gas companies would have to pay the gas owners at least 12.5 percent of the revenue from the gas.
EQT lawyers argue that the company invested time and money on leases, betting financially that, eventually, more modern drilling techniques would fuel skyrocketing production in West Virginia’s Marcellus Shale gas fields.
“It was entirely foreseeable that, over time and with investment, mineral extraction technology and related infrastructure would continue to improve, new technologies would develop, and the market for natural gas would grow,” the company maintained in its lawsuit, filed in U.S. District Court in Clarksburg.
EQT wants a federal judge to throw out the entire 1982 statute. The company declined to comment on the lawsuit beyond its court filings.
A victory for the company could shift millions of dollars in gas royalties from West Virginia residents and businesses to out-of-state gas producers like EQT, a politically connected company with a board member, Bray Cary, who is a top adviser to Gov. Jim Justice.
So far, the Justice administration is fighting the EQT lawsuit. Lawyers for the state have asked for it to be dismissed, citing the state’s interest in preventing the gas industry from “continuing to capitalize on older, flat-rate leases that provided unforeseen windfall profits in the modern natural gas marketplace.”
Tom Huber, president of the West Virginia Royalty Owners Association, said the company’s lawsuit shows that “EQT’s greed knows no limits.”
“They are determined to suck every bit of gas they can out of our state and pay us next to nothing for it,” Huber said. “EQT wants us to starve so they can please their Wall Street investors.”
Linda Stimmell’s natural gas story starts on Sept. 17, 1906, when her grandfather’s grandfather signed a lease that gave the rights to oil and gas under a 150-acre tract of land in Doddridge County to Carnegie Natural Gas.
The company drilled two wells there shortly afterward. A century later, both are still producing, even if just a trickle of gas in today’s market. Equitable Resources, EQT’s former name, took the wells over in 1999, when it acquired Carnegie Natural Gas. The lease lasts forever, or at least as long as the wells are active.
Stimmell inherited part of the gas rights from Bates, her great-great-grandfather on her father’s side, but she’s not sure exactly what her share is, or how many of her distant relatives, all descendants of Bates, are co-owners.
Situations like Stimmell’s aren’t that unusual in West Virginia.
Land ownership is often complex and confusing. Someone might own the surface land, while someone else owns the the coal, oil or gas underneath. Tracts such as natural gas reserves become divided among multiple owners, as land and mineral rights are passed down across generations.
In Stimmell’s case, Bates split his gas and other holdings among his five children. They split what they inherited among their children, and so on. After a couple of generations, what began as a one-half ownership turns into a one-twentieth share.
Stimmell didn’t pay attention to any of this until 1996, when her father died and she inherited part of the Bates mineral holdings. Her dad, George B. Swiger, worked more than 40 years for Hope Gas, as a maintenance man who helped residential customers with gas connections for their stoves, furnaces and hot-water tanks.
“My father retired from Hope Gas, and he always told me, don’t trust the gas companies,” Stimmell said. “I thought nothing about any of this stuff until he passed away.”
Stimmell soon learned. Her checks certainly weren’t making her rich, but her life seemed to become consumed by skirmishes with various gas companies.
Some West Virginians have gotten wealthy from the natural gas boom, the mineral rights under an old family farm turning them into “Marcellus millionaires.”
But Stimmell’s experience is just as common, and it reflects what some state residents who own land or minerals in the state’s gas-producing region go through: One company quibbled with her about the specific location for a gas line she requested to a cabin she kept on the old family property when she moved to Morgantown. Another wanted to wrestle with her over a right-of-way to build its new gas transmission pipeline.
There were periodic requests to amend her family’s leases to allow the gas company to reach more reserves. The industry says these are efforts to “modernize” leases. But those kinds of requests seldom include an offer to increase royalty payments to a more modern rate. Stimmell’s mail became an endless string of paperwork, much of it almost impossible to really understand.
And one thing is certain: As long as EQT holds her lease, and keeps producing even a little gas from it, she can’t work out a deal for some other company to drill a different well into a different gas formation — perhaps the Marcellus — and pay her larger royalties. It’s a common problem for some West Virginians in gas counties. Wells are “held by production,” allowing companies to avoid having to pay the costs to shut down and plug an old well, or just to stave off competition from some other company.
There once was hope for Stimmell, during a mid-2000s lawsuit over natural gas royalties.
Flat-rate leases are “void and unenforceable,” Roane County Circuit Judge Thomas C. Evans III had ruled, citing the legislative findings from the 1982 law.
“To enforce such a contract term under these circumstances would require this court to perpetuate oppression and injustice, in violation of the clear public policy of this state,” Evans ruled in August 2006.
But Evans didn’t offer gas owners like Stimmell any relief — no court order or statewide injunction. West Virginia lawmakers hadn’t provided any remedy, either.
Lawmakers in 1982 applied the law only to future gas wells, those that needed new permits from the state. They were trying to stay within the Contracts Clause of the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits public officials from interfering with private contracts unless there is a compelling public interest.
Lawyers representing gas owners in royalty cases have never tried to get a court to order higher royalties for pre-1982 wells. They, too, worry that the Contracts Clause would stand in their way.
Meanwhile, the 12.5 percent required by that 1982 law itself is growing outdated. As demand for natural gas increases, gas producers routinely pay as much as 16, 18 or even 20 percent royalties when they negotiate new leases for the right to drill.
Years ago, Stimmell was surfing the internet, trying to educate herself about gas leases, and she came across David McMahon, a lawyer and founder of the West Virginia Surface Owners Rights Organization.
McMahon, in a recent legal brief, cited Stimmell as an example of what might become more commonplace if EQT wins its lawsuit to throw out the 1982 law that requires royalties of 12.5 percent for newly drilled wells.
That law doesn’t help Stimmell, because her wells were drilled before 1982. But McMahon used the numbers from her well to show how paying a 12.5 percent royalty — rather than a flat fee — helps other gas owners with new wells.
If EQT had paid Stimmell and other Bates heirs 12.5 percent — one-eighth is the way the law expresses it — since 1982, McMahon wrote, they would have received $71,000 over that time. Instead, they received $22,000 from their flat-rate lease.
The difference would be far greater in situations in which EQT and other companies have drilled horizontal wells that can access far more gas. A modern well can produce about $7.1 million worth of gas a year and, with a 12.5-percent royalty rate, generate royalties worth more than $887,000 annually, McMahon wrote, citing one example.
If the companies were able to revert to leases paying $300 a year, they would collect “a windfall,” McMahon wrote, “depriving landowners in this state of income vital to their fortunes and families and the state’s economy — a windfall that the state has a legitimate interest in preventing.”
Even paying 12.5 percent is a good deal, he said. “They get to keep the other seven eighths.”
EQT argues in its lawsuit that those old leases “apportioned the risk according to each party’s preference at the time.” Gas owners would receive a reliable payment for gas development, regardless of how much gas was eventually produced. Producing companies would have “the incentive to invest in improving natural gas extraction, production and marketing.”
“Making such investments is exactly what EQT has done,” the EQT lawsuit says. “Over the better part of a century, EQT has invested millions of dollars to improve techniques for extracting natural gas and for infrastructure to develop an integrated market for natural gas.”
EQT says it should be able to “enjoy the returns of such investments,” without state lawmakers interfering with its leases.
During previous major cases over gas royalties, the two trade associations that represent the gas industry filed friend of the court briefs on the company’s side. This time, however, industry groups have stayed out of the case. EQT has said in court documents that flat-rate leases represent “a relatively small percentage of all leases in West Virginia,” but that it believes it holds the greatest number of them.
Some of EQT’s competitors say that getting rid of the flat-rate statute isn’t a priority for them.
“It just didn’t feel like the spirit of what we were trying to do with these legacy leases in West Virginia,” said Al Schopp, a regional senior vice president and spokesman for Antero Resources, the state’s largest gas producer.
Stimmell said she worries about the day when EQT might show up and want to drill a Marcellus well on the Bates lease. If EQT wins its current lawsuit, her six grandchildren would be stuck sharing a $300 per year flat payment — not a percentage cut of the millions of dollars a modern well could generate.
“I’ve always said I’m not against drilling,” Stimmell said. “But I am for the people — the mineral owners and the surface owners — to be paid a fair price.”
The Charleston Gazette-Mail and ProPublica want to tell the story of the changing landscape in West Virginia, and how coal and natural gas are impacting it. West Virginians: Tell us how your community is changing. Call or text us at 347-244-2134, or email us: changingwv@wvgazettemail.com.
Here’s what we’d like to see:
Photos or videos (including then-and-now visuals) showing changes in your life because of natural gas or those of family or friends working in the industry.
Any correspondence you’ve had with state or local government officials about natural gas development. Have you asked for help, and if so, what has been the response?
Experiences regarding royalty payments. Do you lease mineral rights to a drilling company or producer? If so, tell us what that’s been like.
Ken Ward Jr. covers the environment, workplace safety and energy, with a focus on coal and natural gas, for the Charleston Gazette-Mail. Email him at kward@wvgazettemail.com and follow him on Twitter at @kenwardjr.
Filed under:
 

Pro Publica Thisthenewarticlestart
Chicago City Council Members Seek Hearing on Psychiatric Hospital
Aldermen ask for hearing to address allegations of sexual and physical abuse at Aurora Chicago Lakeshore Hospital.
Nov. 14, 5:52 p.m. CST
Illinois Children Languish in Psychiatric Hospitals
Two Chicago City Council members Wednesday called for a hearing to look into reports that children at a psychiatric hospital were physically and sexually abused, including those in state care.
Alderman Ed Burke, the powerful chairman of the council’s Finance Committee, and Alderman Margaret Laurino, from the Northwest Side’s 39th Ward, introduced the resolution calling for a hearing on Aurora Chicago Lakeshore Hospital. The request, which cited ProPublica Illinois investigations, asks for details on the hospital’s business license and a review of the allegations.
ProPublica Illinois found 16 allegations of abuse or neglect at the hospital in Uptown involving children since January. The Illinois Department of Children and Family Services, which is charged with investigating those allegations, found sufficient evidence to support four. Seven were not substantiated, and five continue to be investigated.
Some of those children had already been cleared for discharge but remained at the hospital because DCFS failed to find them a more appropriate placement.
Our newsletter is written by a ProPublica Illinois reporter every week
Among the allegations that DCFS is investigating is that of a 7-year-old girl who was taken to the emergency room after she reported that a 12-year-old boy pulled down her pants and sexually assaulted her with his finger, according to confidential reports obtained by ProPublica Illinois. The agency also continues to investigate allegations of an 8-year-old boy who reported that his peers hit him, climbed on top of him and masturbated next to his bed, records show.
The Chicago Tribune also has reported on the allegations at the hospital.
“These are very serious charges and we want to hear what everyone has to say,” Laurino said in an email. “Hopefully, by holding the hearing, we’ll be able to shed more light on the issue. We also hope that by bringing together the various interested parties, they will move forward and do the right things to correct any problems.”
The proposal was referred to the council’s Committee on License and Consumer Protection, where representatives from the city’s Department of Business Affairs and Consumer Protection will be called to address the status of the hospital’s business license.
“The City cannot ignore these allegations as ‘someone else’s’ matter to resolve,” the resolution read.
The Illinois Department of Public Health licenses the state’s psychiatric hospitals. It also evaluates facilities for Medicare and Medicaid certification.
“IDPH appreciates any and all cooperation to protect the health and safety of Illinoisans, particularly vulnerable children,” spokeswoman Emma Ciavarella said.
The state’s public health inspectors are investigating the hospital on behalf of federal officials for patient monitoring and medication consent violations. Federal regulators have set a Nov. 30 deadline for the hospital to fix the violations or lose federal funding, which hospital officials said would force them to close the facility. The hospital has submitted a plan of correction.
Hospital CEO David Fletcher-Janzen, who has said that the hospital operates “at the highest standards,” said in response to Wednesday’s proposal that any review of the hospital should be done by someone who understands trauma, DCFS and operational issues at a psychiatric hospital.
DCFS sends a large number of children in its care to Lakeshore because the hospital accepts children and teens with the highest needs that other hospitals have turned away, DCFS officials have said. In response to the allegations at Lakeshore, DCFS stopped sending children to the hospital this month and agreed to an independent review involving children in its care at the facility.
The agency is working with the American Civil Liberties Union of Illinois, which monitors DCFS as part of a decades-old consent decree, to select an expert to lead the review and determine its scope.
“DCFS is focused on its responsibility for monitoring the safety, care and treatment of foster youth at Lakeshore each day,” said Neil Skene, special assistant to the agency’s acting director.
Wednesday’s resolution also asks the Cook County acting public guardian, Charles Golbert, and representatives from the city’s Law and Public Health departments to appear at the hearing. Golbert has been vocal in his call for an independent review of the hospital. He called the proposed hearing a positive development.
“The citizens of Chicago have a right to know what’s going on next door,” Golbert said. “This hospital is operating in Chicago and DCFS frankly wants everything to be be kept quiet and swept under the rug.”
Filed under:
 

Pro Publica Thisthenewarticlestart
Brothers Who Were Online Friends With Pittsburgh Shooting Suspect Had Ties to Violent Neo-Nazis
The authorities said they arrested a Washington, D.C., man who had hailed the suspect and might have known more about the attack. The man and his brother had talked of wanting to kill Jews and blacks, prosecutors said.
Nov. 14, 6:30 p.m. EST
Tracking Hate Crimes and Bias Incidents
The morning of the synagogue massacre in Pittsburgh last month, 23-year-old Edward Clark killed himself in a Washington, D.C., park.
Ever since, the authorities have been piecing together a disturbing portrait of Clark and his older brother, Jeffrey Clark, 30, who had been online friends with the suspect in the Pittsburgh attack. Online, Jeffrey Clark had called the massacre a “dry run for things to come.”
Now, there are new indications that the lives of the Clark brothers in Washington intersected with some of the most violent white supremacist groups in the country — including Atomwaffen Division, a neo-Nazi organization that calls for racially motivated, lone-wolf terror attacks like Pittsburgh and whose members or associates have been charged in five murders in the last two years.
 This story is part of an ongoing collaboration between ProPublica and Frontline. Watch “Documenting Hate: New American Nazis” on PBS on Nov. 20 at 9 p.m. Eastern, 8 Central, and online at pbs.org/frontline.
In court filings, prosecutors say Edward Clark had used the handle DC_Stormer on the social media platform Gab, a site favored by racists and other extremists. That same handle appears in Atomwaffen’s secret chat logs, which ProPublica and Frontline have been reviewing as part of ongoing reporting about the resurgence of white supremacists and the groups involved in the violent 2017 rally in Charlottesville, Virginia.
Both Clark brothers participated in the rally, according accounts given to prosecutors by their family, and were affiliated with Vanguard America, a white supremacist group at the center of the violence that day. Many Vanguard America members ended up joining Atomwaffen in the months after Charlottesville.
In the Atomwaffen chat logs obtained by ProPublica and Frontline, members of the group from Northern Virginia mention DC_Stormer and their plans to see one of the group’s leaders in Houston.
A former Atomwaffen member told Frontline and ProPublica on Wednesday that he is familiar with the handle DC_Stormer, although he is not certain it belongs to Edward Clark. He said DC_Stormer was most likely either a member or what the group called an “initiate,” someone seeking formal entrance into the group.
Subscribe to the Big Story newsletter.
Last week, authorities in Washington arrested Jeffrey Clark on weapons charges and made public his online connection to the Pittsburgh suspect, Robert Bowers. Federal prosecutors, in court filings, said that he may have known more about the attack and that both brothers had talked about wanting to kill Jews and blacks.
Requests for comment made to Jeffrey Clark’s lawyer via telephone and email were not immediately returned. He has not yet entered a plea.
The FBI is investigating Atomwaffen and its members, but it would not comment on Wednesday when asked if the bureau had reason to believe either Clark brother had been associated with the group.
In reporting for an upcoming film, “Documenting Hate: New American Nazis,” which airs on Tuesday, Frontline and ProPublica developed a list of at least 80 members or associates of Atomwaffen — some with their names, most with their online handles. Based on interviews with former members and the chat logs, at least seven current or former Army troops or Marines have joined the group since its formation.
The group came together in Florida in 2015 and draws much of its inspiration from the writings of an obscure neo-Nazi, James Mason, who advocates lone-wolf attacks and reveres figures such as Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh and notorious killer Charles Manson.
The Clark family told prosecutors that the brothers had also openly admired McVeigh, Manson and Unabomber Ted Kaczynski. They said the brothers believed that there would be a race revolution, and they wanted to hasten it.
In a variety of online posts, the Clark brothers are often pictured together, sometimes with prominent figures in the white supremacist movement. In the court filing, prosecutors said the two appeared in photos with weapons, masks and a flag with a skull and crossbones. One of the pictures included an image of Dylann Roof, the young man who killed nine black church members in South Carolina.
According to the authorities, on the day of the Pittsburgh killings, Jeffrey Clark “engaged in unusual behavior” when he learned his brother, Edward, wasn’t home and told his mother he was going to call the police. Edward Clark was eventually found on Theodore Roosevelt Island, dead of a gunshot from a Beretta pistol, one of two guns registered to him. The police found magazines with additional ammunition at the scene, but no suicide note.
It wasn’t until days later that family members contacted the FBI office in Washington and expressed worry that Jeffrey Clark might pose a danger to himself or others. The family told the FBI of the men’s associations with white hate groups and said they feared Edward Clark might have been intending to use the extra ammunition to kill others.
The family members said Jeffrey Clark had been “really riled up” and “agitated” since the Pittsburgh murders and said he openly worried the FBI might be coming to see him because of his connection to Bowers.
Priyanka Boghani and Karim Hajj contributed reporting.
 

Pro Publica Thisthenewarticlestart
How We Analyzed the Outcomes of Those Freed by Oregon’s Psychiatric Security Review Board

Nov. 14, 5 a.m. EST
Repeat Attacks After Pleading Insanity 
This article was produced in partnership with the Malheur Enterprise, which is a member of the ProPublica Local Reporting Network.
Studies of the criminal justice system rarely consider what happens after insanity defendants are freed. In Oregon, that has meant state leaders have had no objective measure of the state’s approach, which places more people into community treatment and frees them from state supervision more quickly than other states.
The Malheur Enterprise and ProPublica calculated outcomes by reviewing public records collected from the Psychiatric Security Review Board, courts and state agencies. The analysis is among a handful of recidivism studies of insanity defendants, experts said.
Get ProPublica’s Daily&nbsp;Digest.
Reporters searched available electronic court records for all 334 people freed by the review board from 2008-17. Because digital court records in Oregon are incomplete before 2016 and because not all states were searchable online, the analysis likely understates the number of new crimes committed.
People’s identities were confirmed by birthdate or matching the original insanity case to a person later charged with a new crime who shared the same state offender ID. Often, both were available to match.
We then looked at what happened during the three-year period after people were released, the standard approach among scholars. Of the 334 people freed between 2008-17, that period could be examined for 220 of them.
About 35 percent, or 76 people, were criminally charged again within three years. An additional 18 people committed new crimes after that period.
Most often, people freed after being found not guilty by reason of insanity were back in criminal court in little more than a year. Many appear to have become homeless shortly after leaving the state’s supervision, even though housing is identified as a primary need when they are discharged.
They were charged with felonies about as often as people freed after serving prison terms — both 16 percent — according to our analysis and the Oregon Department of Corrections. Experts said that matches research studies finding little evidence that mentally ill people are more likely to commit violent crimes.
One researcher studied rearrest rates among Oregon insanity defendants in 1986. The analysis, published in the International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, was done by Dr. Joseph Bloom, a forensic psychiatrist who once served as dean of medicine at Oregon Health &amp; Science University and has been president of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law.
His results paralleled those found by the Enterprise-ProPublica analysis.
Bloom searched for criminal records in an Oregon police database that is not available to the public but that is regularly used by the review board to monitor clients. In 1982, he tallied the new arrests of 144 people freed from state supervision from 1978-80. He found that 42 percent had been arrested within 18 months and that 16 percent were arrested for felonies.
A more recent study looked at Connecticut, which is one of three states with a Psychiatric Security Review Board similar to Oregon’s.
Dr. Michael Norko and five other authors tracked the recidivism of 215 people freed by that state’s board between 1985 and 2015. They found that 16 percent were later re-arrested, with about a third of those being for felony crimes, according to the article published in the Behavioral Sciences and the Law.
“Given the signiﬁcant commitment of resources in the state devoted to the PSRB’s supervision, monitoring, and community support of acquittees, these results have important policy and public safety implications,” the authors wrote.
Jayme Fraser is a reporter for the Malheur Enterprise. She’s spending the year examining the way states manage people with mental illnesses who commit violent crimes — in Oregon and nationally. Are there problems with the way your state handles people who are violent and have mental illnesses? Email her at jayme@malheurenterprise.com and follow her on Twitter @JaymeKFraser.
Filed under:
 

Pro Publica Thisthenewarticlestart
Oregon Board Says Those Found Criminally Insane Rarely Commit New Crimes. The Numbers Say Otherwise.
The Psychiatric Security Review Board questioned how many people it discharged from state custody returned to crime. But it did not share its findings or change policies even as former clients killed or raped.
Nov. 14, 5 a.m. EST
Repeat Attacks After Pleading Insanity 
This article was produced in partnership with the Malheur Enterprise, which is a member of the ProPublica Local Reporting Network.
Update, Nov. 20, 2018: After the publication of this story, Oregon’s Psychiatric Security Review Board informed the Malheur Enterprise that it did not provide the news organization with complete data for this story. We have asked for the omitted information and will update this story when it becomes available.
About 35 percent of people found criminally insane in Oregon and then let out of supervised psychiatric treatment were charged with new crimes within three years of being freed by state officials, according to a comprehensive new analysis by ProPublica and the Malheur Enterprise.
The analysis and interviews show that Oregon releases people found not guilty by reason of insanity from supervision and treatment more quickly than nearly every other state in the nation. The speed at which the state releases the criminally insane from custody is driven by both Oregon’s unique-in-the-nation law and state officials’ expansive interpretation of applicable federal court rulings.
Subscribe to the Big Story newsletter.
In Oregon, those decisions are made by the Psychiatric Security Review Board. The five-member panel of mental health and probation experts has custody of defendants found not guilty by reason of insanity and oversees their treatment.
Between Jan. 1, 2008, and Oct. 15, 2015, the state freed 220 defendants who had been acquitted of felonies because they could not tell right from wrong or control their actions. About a quarter of them, or 51 people, were charged with attacking others within three years. Twenty-five were charged with lesser crimes. Eighteen others were charged more than three years later, including 12 people for violent incidents.
They were charged with felonies about as often as people freed after serving prison terms — both 16 percent — according to our analysis and the Oregon Department of Corrections.
The frequency of new crimes and violence startled experts who have long hailed Oregon as a leader in balancing the civil rights of patients against the need to protect the community. Many mistakenly believed that only a tiny percentage of the people released by state officials went on to commit new crimes.
“I didn’t know that,” said Dr. Landy Sparr, who directs the Forensic Psychiatry Training Program at Oregon Health &amp; Science University in Portland and has evaluated hundreds of insanity defendants in the state. “I’m totally surprised.”
One reason for Sparr’s misimpression was that the Psychiatric Security Review Board has not publicly disclosed what it has learned about this issue.
On its website, the board assures Oregonians that repeat offenses by people it supervises are exceedingly rare events, with only 0.46 percent of defendants committing new crimes each year.
That rosy statistic does not encompass the significant problem of what happens after defendants are freed, and the board knows it. Almost three years ago, internal documents show, board officials exchanged emails about the rate of crimes committed by clients released from oversight. The officials launched a preliminary study of three sample years, which found from one-third to one-half of the people freed by the board had since been arrested on new charges. They limited that search to Oregon records, which means the real number of crimes is almost certainly larger.
Those numbers are “higher than I was expecting given how well our clients do on supervision,’’ Juliet Britton, the board’s former executive director, wrote in a September 2017 email.
The board’s study of what happens to people it frees was never shared with the public. Nor was it provided to the governor, who appoints the board; the legislature, which oversees its budget; or the treatment providers who work with its clients, according to available records. They now say they never shared its figures because the study wasn’t finished and it wasn’t peer reviewed, the process in which academic journals enlist independent scholars to review a researcher’s findings before publication.
The agency’s calculations were described in internal emails obtained through a public records request. Board officials did not acknowledge the existence of the figures in interviews for this story. Instead, they questioned the methodology and ethics of the Enterprise-ProPublica analysis, even though it paralleled what the board had already done.
Executive Director Alison Bort declined to answer eight written questions about the board’s internal study and its public statements about recidivism. She said in an email that the inquiries were “loaded and conclusive that our agency has been intentionally dishonest.” (Read this timeline to see the questions, the board’s public comments and internal emails since 2016.)
Bort said the agency is concerned about the frequency of new crimes committed by people it frees. She defended the decision not to share the recidivism figures with the public, saying they had “not been statistically analyzed.” “It would not only be irresponsible (and for me as a licensed psychologist, unethical), but potentially harmful for the agency (or any entity) to share with the public at its current stage,” she wrote.
Bort said the agency is not currently working on the study. She said officials may resume the research next year if the legislature does not give the board additional duties that “would take precedence.’’
For now, the Enterprise-ProPublica analysis offers the only public accounting of what happened to people the board has released in recent years. We obtained the names of every person the board freed and searched criminal records available in Oregon and across the country.
In many cases, we found, insanity defendants returned to abusing drugs, damaging property or hurting themselves or others. In the most extreme cases, they raped or killed.
Among those harmed were relatives caring for them without adequate support and police officers called to confront deeply distressed people.
We began investigating the state’s system for the criminally insane after Anthony Montwheeler, a man who had long lived along the Oregon-Idaho border, was charged with two murders just weeks after the board released him.
Montwheeler’s case was extreme but not unusual.
There was Timothy Ashmus, a man from a coastal Oregon town who was found not guilty by reason of insanity in a December 2010 burglary, mischief and theft case.
Within five months of his sentencing, the Psychiatric Security Review Board decided he was no longer mentally ill and freed him. Seven months later, Ashmus got high on meth, strangled his 8-year-old relative and then threw a toddler across the room. He was sentenced to probation for criminal mistreatment and strangulation. He accrued other minor charges until, about two years later, he was sent to prison for raping a woman who had came by his house to give him a ride to a karaoke night with friends. In a letter to the Enterprise, Ashmus denied the rape and said he had been wrongly convicted.
Dung Phan, a Portland man, was freed from the board’s supervision in 2014 after being found criminally insane in a 1997 arson, mischief and trespassing case. Within weeks, he was charged with assault, but the case was dropped. About a year later, he threw a flaming newspaper at the back of a Korean tourist, which quickly burned a hole through her down coat. Phan told police he was “the next Hitler”; doctors said he was suffering from schizophrenic delusions. Authorities charged him with arson, intimidation, attempted assault and reckless endangerment. He apologized in court and pleaded insanity. A judge agreed and returned him to the oversight of the Psychiatric Security Review Board.
A divided board voted to release Anthony Aldeguer in 2011 after he had spent more than three years in the state’s care. A Polk County judge had found Aldeguer legally insane in 2007 after he attacked two police officers who were attempting to arrest him for making meth. Almost two years after being freed, he was charged with possession of meth and cocaine, but the case was dismissed for insufficient evidence. In 2015, he pled guilty to another possession charge while homeless. Later that year, he fired shots at two men who were pulling their raft from the Yamhill River near Bellevue. He pleaded guilty to menacing and reckless endangerment, among other charges, and was sentenced to 18 months in prison.
The Enterprise mailed letters to the last known address of every person in this story who had been found criminally insane. Most were returned undeliverable. When phone numbers could be found, a reporter also tried calling. Ashmus was the only person to respond.
Most states are reluctant to end oversight of people like Ashmus, Phan and Aldeguer until they show that they can manage their illnesses on their own and are not a danger to others. Many states supervise the care of such defendants for decades longer than Oregon and rarely, if ever, end all oversight.
Oregon is different because of both legal restrictions and the approach of state officials who make the decisions.
Experts also said the Enterprise-ProPublica review illustrates deeper failings in the state’s treatment of people with mental illness, which is often a lifelong chronic condition. The defendants freed by the board could well be stable the day they leave state custody. But without access to health care, housing, employment counseling, a positive social network and a caseworker to help them navigate a social safety net, they can be a substantial danger.
“It’s very expensive to provide all of that. There isn’t enough of that for people who have the need,” said Larry Fitch, the retired state director of forensic services and mental health in Maryland. “If you’re in the community and you’re not under a court order that leverages all these resources for you, you get what you personally can manage to leverage and it’s rarely going to be optimal.”
Bort said the board was doing all it could to protect the public, given the limits imposed by state and federal law. She said the number of serious, violent crimes the Enterprise-ProPublica review documented was “concerning, of course,” but “that’s different from our responsibility.”
Board members have declined repeated interview requests but said in a joint response to written questions that the 11-person agency has “limited resources.” The governor appoints five people to serve on the board part time: a psychiatrist, a psychologist, an attorney, a probation or parole officer, and a public member. The executive director oversees a small staff that facilitates more than 1,000 hearings each year and coordinates with treatment providers.
“While any recidivism by any former client is concerning, our agency’s responsibility is to the clients under our jurisdiction,” they wrote.
Britton, the board’s former director, took the opposite view, arguing that the board has a responsibility to track what happened to former clients.
In a 2016 email about the plans to conduct a detailed study of recidivism, Britton and a staff analyst told state police she needed data on arrests of released clients “to carry out PSRB’s legislative responsibilities.”
Britton, in an email this month to The Enterprise, wrote that she left the agency while the study was still in the planning phase and that additional statistical analysis and outside review had to be done before it could be released. ““Despite having the primary duties related to operating a highly complex state agency, staff, including myself, dedicated weekends and evenings to these special projects in an effort to shed light on the forensic mental health system.”
State law does not require the board to track outcomes of their decisions to free people. But Britton said in emails that she believed board nonetheless needed that information to improve decisions and guide policy reforms.
Susan Harmon agrees.
She believes her daughter, one of Montwheeler’s ex-wives, would be alive if the board had taken a less legalistic approach to its duties and listened to doctors who warned that Montwheeler was likely to attack family or friends.
Instead, board members unanimously voted to free him. He is now charged in connection with the deaths of Annita Harmon and David Bates, whose car he hit during a police chase.
“They should be held accountable,” Harmon said of the board.
In the 1960s, the United States moved away from warehousing people with mental illness, both because of the costs and a growing civil rights movement.
Congress offered states financial incentives to expand mental health care within local communities. Oregon was the first in the nation to extend this approach to people deemed criminally insane.
In 1971, Oregon overhauled laws governing insanity defendants, moving many patients out of the Oregon State Hospital into supervised community treatment. Dozens of states have since adopted similar practices for insanity defendants. About 30 states routinely release all but the most ill or dangerous defendants from secure psychiatric hospitals, sending them to less restrictive environments where doctors can keep a close eye on their mental health. Studies show this helps patients gain the ability to live on their own while protecting the public.
Oregon’s strategy stood out in two ways.
In 1978, legislators created the Psychiatric Security Review Board, making Oregon one of only three states where a professional board, not a judge, manages custody of the criminally insane. The others are Connecticut and Arizona, where far fewer people successfully plead insanity.
Forensic psychiatry experts argue that Oregon’s system more effectively protects defendants’ rights because judges, who are often elected, overly worry about the political risks of freeing people from supervision. States that rely on judges, they say, tend to lock the criminally insane in costly, secure facilities long after they are well enough to be set free.
Oregon also is one of only five states where, by law, the state must end its oversight of people found not guilty by reason of insanity at the moment they would have completed the maximum prison sentence had they been convicted of a crime.
This sets Oregon apart. Most states free people only after doctors conclude they can live on their own without posing a danger to themselves or others. The doctors must persuade a judge their conclusion is sound. Oregon requires no such assessment when a defendant’s time is up. It just opens the door.
A review of hundreds of cases shows that when Oregon officials make those decisions, they interpret federal court rulings differently from their colleagues in other states, putting greater weight on individuals’ rights to freedom. Other states take a narrower view of the same decisions, putting more emphasis on protecting the community.
Bob Joondeph, the longtime leader of Disability Rights Oregon, defended the state’s approach as fundamentally fair to people with mental illness.
“If you think somebody is a bad actor, should we hold on to them for the rest of their lives?” he asked.
He said the answer in other states is often influenced by prejudices against people with mental illness, even though researchers have not directly linked those conditions to violence. He noted that even in Oregon, most people who plead insanity remain under state supervision longer than if they had served a prison sentence.
(One reason for that statistic is that defendants who plead guilty to crimes or are convicted rarely receive the longest possible prison sentence. The Enterprise-ProPublica study found that about half of the people who plead insanity end up being supervised for the maximum possible period.)
Today, Oregon monitors about 500 people sent to treatment instead of prison because active symptoms of a mental disorder, like schizophrenia or a developmental disability, made it impossible for them to follow the law.
The process begins when a judge or jury rules that a person charged with a crime is “guilty except for insanity.’’ Despite the apparent meaning of those words, the finding is legally equivalent to “not guilty.’’ Typically, people start their care at the state mental hospital. If they make progress, doctors ask the Psychiatric Security Review Board for permission to move them into community treatment, which ranges from a secured facility to a group home, supported housing or even independent living. At each step along the way, they remain in the custody of the board, with state officials deciding how much freedom they can be allowed.
Two-thirds of Oregonians who pleaded insanity live in the community while being monitored by state officials, going to therapy, attending support groups and working. If they violate terms of conditional release, the board can have them arrested and return them to the state hospital.
The board can decide to discharge patients early for two reasons: If they are no longer a danger to the public or if they are no longer affected by one of the qualifying mental disorders spelled out in law. These include schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, but not personality disorders, substance use or sexual behaviors such as pedophilia. The legislature and state appeals courts have repeatedly narrowed the legal definition of the mental illnesses that qualify for an insanity defense, requiring the board to free people courts had found criminally insane under the previous rules.
Bort, who treated people found legally insane as a psychologist before becoming director of the board, said the decisions can be difficult.
“We’re trying to balance a person’s civil rights with the law, with the dangerousness,” she said.
The text of Oregon’s law sets a seemingly clear standard for what should take precedence. It says, “the board shall have as its primary concern the protection of society.”
The Enterprise-ProPublica review of criminal records covered all 334 people freed by the board from 2008 to 2017. We excluded those who have not yet been free for three years from our recidivism calculations, as is the state’s research standard, but we did include them in a tally of the total damage to people and property.
Most of the people released by the board in the last decade were not accused of new crimes. But among those arrested after their release, two-thirds were charged with violent crimes, from minor assault to murder.
Those cases involved 63 defendants freed from 2008 to 2017 and attacks on at least 155 people.
Family members were those most often hurt seriously. The 25 people identified in court records ranged from kids and girlfriends to parents and siblings. They were shoved into walls, punched, choked and chased with knives.
In 2011, the board decided that Josiah Schindler was not affected by a mental disability, despite his mom later telling a judge he was diagnosed at birth and had undergone numerous brain surgeries related to his condition. After he was freed, he was repeatedly charged with nuisance and property charges.
Last year, he beat his mom at their home. An automatic restraining order was placed, as is common in domestic violence cases. To have the order lifted and to return to caring for her son, a judge ordered the mom to group therapy.
This summer, Schindler was sent back to the Oregon State Hospital for treatment until he was mentally fit enough to enter pleas in his ongoing cases.
Others freed by the review board were charged with mostly minor assaults involving at least 32 first responders. Court records show some hit, bit or spit on police officers, medics and jail officers.
In 10 cases, service workers at fast food restaurants, grocery stores and gas stations were attacked or threatened.
One man freed by the review board soon stalked a woman, walking around the block repeatedly to look in the window of the hair salon where she worked. After Cody Adams was convicted and given probation in that case, he stalked another woman. He repeatedly entered her coffee shop and lingered despite being told to leave. Once, he stole a cinnamon twist. That case was dropped because the woman said she wouldn’t prosecute if he promised to leave her alone.
An additional 16 criminal cases involved apparent strangers.
Public records also documented self-harm, attempted suicides and frequent stints of homelessness after people were freed by the state board.
The Oregon State Hospital said nine people released by the board were returned to its care under a civil commitment, which requires a court to find that someone is an immediate risk to harm themselves or others. One person was committed just three months after being freed by the review board.
Courts sent an additional 19 people to the state hospital for mental health treatment so they could understand proceedings in their new criminal cases.
Members of the Psychiatric Security Review Board defended their “exceptional record” and said arrests and civil commitments were not necessarily evidence that a person they had released was dangerous.
“Did the victim feel this was the only way to get the offender mental health treatment and/or resources? Did the county mental health provider attempt to civilly commit the client to avoid a criminal act, but could not meet the ‘imminent danger’ threshold? Were the police attempting to get the offender some help?” board members wrote in a joint statement. “Given that these complexities add context to these findings, we would caution against any interpretations made from these statistics.”
Bort also criticized the Enterprise-ProPublica analysis as too focused on “potential mistakes that are made and who is not doing enough to address those mistakes.”
Dr. Joseph Bloom, who the board has repeatedly turned to for help studying the system, disagreed, saying the analysis was a critical measure of how well the board rehabilitated the criminally insane and if the services those Oregonians received once free were adequate. The retired forensic psychiatrist once served as dean of medicine at Oregon Health &amp; Science University and is a former president of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law.
Bloom wrote in 1986 that there was at least a “subgroup” for whom “psychiatric treatment had no effectiveness in preventing criminal behavior.” Later research would support this: Although people with mental illness are overrepresented in the criminal justice system, a relatively small percentage of their crimes are directly tied to symptoms of their illness, making health treatment alone ineffective at reducing new crime.
Bloom, now living in Arizona, defended Oregon’s system as more equitable than those in other states, but said the Enterprise-ProPublica findings troubled him.
“The system works, I think, aside from discharge. I don’t know if (that) is working,” he said. “There needs to be some review of what the issues are.”
The board freed Ashmus about five months after he was found not guilty by reason of insanity for a string of assaults and a burglary that could have sent him to prison for 21 years.
Bort defended that decision as routine, a result of the facts and Oregon’s law, even if common sense might suggest otherwise. What Ashmus did next is a grim illustration of what is at stake when the board decides to free someone doctors warned was dangerous.
Ashmus’ violent behavior and struggles with drug use began when he was a teenager. His younger sister was diagnosed with cancer at age 12 and died four years later. The alcohol wasn’t enough to dull the pain, and so he said he began using heroin and meth. After 18 months in prison on a burglary conviction, Ashmus was sober for 17 years. He said he focused on being an attentive father to his young daughter.
But then Ashmus fell in love with a woman who used meth. Within a year, he resumed his use of the drug and began to deal when they broke up. One night, he was beaten and robbed by friends.
“I was lured to a dark place at night,” he wrote in a letter from prison. “Two people I didn’t see came out of the darkness behind me with baseball bats and beat me till I was unconscious. I was to find out months later from a witness, they actually broke one of the bats on my head.”
Ashmus started to have nightmares whenever he slept. He would have angry outbursts and was irrationally irritable, punching the wall when he got frustrated. He was on edge, constantly nervous. He told doctors he had flashbacks to his assault and had “racing thoughts.”
He said he was diagnosed with PTSD by a community mental health program. State records confirm that he received care, including counseling from a social worker, but did not detail his diagnosis.
In 2010, Ashmus went to court on a string of charges. In one case, Ashmus said he downed 15 Valium pills and robbed a friend’s house of a large TV during an apparent drug-induced blackout. He also faced a serious assault charge related to attacks on his ex-girlfriend.
Because of his ongoing mental health treatment, his attorney advised him to have an evaluation and consider the insanity plea, which would send him for care rather than to prison. Going to the state hospital seemed much better than six years in prison, the plea deal he said he was offered by prosecutors.
“I used the insanity plea because it was the fairest thing being offered to me and I clearly needed help,” he wrote.
A local clinical psychologist examined him for the court, diagnosing Ashmus with post-traumatic stress disorder and major depressive disorder. James Wahl wrote that PTSD, at least, was active at the time of the crimes and so Ashmus “lacked substantial capacity” to understand and follow the law.
As part of a December 2010 plea deal, a judge placed Ashmus into the custody of the Psychiatric Security Review Board for up to 21 years.
Five months later, the board freed Ashmus.
Doctors from the Oregon State Hospital argued that he did not, in fact, have a mental illness. Records note that psychiatrists there diagnosed him with a personality disorder — a behavioral issue, not a disease.
“It is apparent that Mr. Ashmus was voluntarily intoxicated at the time of his crime, which does not excuse criminal behavior,” Dr. James Peykanu wrote.
The board accepted the doctors’ conclusion and freed Ashmus. Because he had been acquitted of his crimes, Ashmus could not be retried or simply moved to prison. The U.S. Bill of Rights bars prosecutors from taking people to trial more than once for the same crime, a concept known as double jeopardy.
Ashmus wrote that he does have PTSD and anxiety disorder with depression. He said he lied to the board and went along with the state doctors’ assessment that he did not have a mental illness because he wanted to be free. In the grand scheme of things, he feels justified.
“It was the right thing to do,” he said. “Dr. Wahl, nor the doctors prior to him, did not make a mistake in my diagnosis. The mistake was clearly I was sent to a facility that had nothing to offer someone with PTSD other than medicating them.”
The board’s decision to free Ashmus came despite warnings he was dangerous.
“Mr. Ashmus is estimated to be at an elevated risk for engaging in aggressive behaviors and his risk to harm others should continue to be monitored,” psychologist Matthew Sturgeon wrote in one progress note for the board.
Sherie Chaney, a mental health nurse practitioner, wrote in a later update that Ashmus “is frequently deceitful as well as impulsive” and often rationalizes “having hurt, mistreated, or stolen from others.”
While he was in custody at the hospital, Ashmus did not respond well to treatment. He refused medications, initially avoided group therapy and was moved into the most secure unit. Although he did not cause anyone physical harm, hospital staff documented repeated threats of violence as well as invitations for female staff to meet him alone in dark places. After one phone call, he punched a wall.
Ashmus’ mother said his time at the state hospital was traumatizing, including because a woman killed herself while he was there. State records also note he was repeatedly assaulted by another patient in his unit. Ashmus needed help, his mother said, but she did not think the secure state hospital was where he belonged.
He said he didn’t have the help he needed once free either. Although officials from the state hospital and the review board insist that a discharge plan is prepared for every person they release, Ashmus said, “they didn’t prepare me in anyway.”
Under its current practices, the board does not examine in detail the plans for a client’s treatment after release, leaving those specifics to county mental health officials. That’s a contrast to the board’s oversight of defendants moving from the state hospital to community treatment, which requires a five-step review and is sometimes delayed until the board is satisfied that public safety is adequately protected.
Seven months after he was freed by the board, Ashmus was high on meth as he watched his 8-year-old daughter and the 3-year-old grandson of his girlfriend. He wrapped his hands around his daughter’s neck, throttling her. He then picked up the boy, threw him in the air and tossed him across the room. In Coos County court, he pled guilty to criminal mistreatment in the first degree and was given three years of probation. Neither child was seriously injured.
In February 2012, just two months later, he was charged with burglarizing a home in North Bend, but the case was dismissed when the victim did not appear before the grand jury.
A year later, he was arrested for stealing gasoline from an electrician’s truck. Although he had a gun, which is illegal for felons, he was not charged for that crime. He spent four days in jail.
About a year after that, in August 2014, police charged him with raping and strangling a 28-year-old woman.
According to court records, Ashmus, then 42, flashed his genitals at the woman. After she said she “did not want to have that kind of relationship,” he raped her. He was sentenced to 19 years in prison. Today, he still insists he is innocent.
Board members said they do not have an opinion about whether Oregon law gives them enough discretion to make decisions that protect public safety. They also declined to “take a position” on other elements that make Oregon’s law and their interpretation of civil rights different from most states.
Bort, who became director this summer, said the agency wants to improve, of course, but described cases like Ashmus’ as unusual but unavoidable.
“Every once in a while, there might be somebody who, despite all the intensive treatment they received, does not internalize it,” she said.
Bort said the board should not be held responsible for what insanity defendants do after they’re freed — even if the results are devastating. Doing so, board members said, was like holding responsible judges, prisons and probation officers for releasing people who go on to commit new crimes.
Bort defended the board’s actions in the Ashmus case as an example of its careful, prudent process for making decisions.
“In that case, the hospital had the gift of time to see what he looked like without any medications, what was left when everything cleared up,” she said.
“And then, as your research showed, he went out and was dangerous again.”
The Malheur Enterprise and ProPublica are hosting a live event about Oregon’s unique emphasis on releasing criminally insane defendants and reintegrating them into the community. “The Consequences of a Sick System” — on Thursday, Nov. 29, 6:30 pm, at the Four Rivers Cultural Center in Ontario, Oregon — will bring together journalists, state health representatives and mental health advocates to address this issue and what changes might better protect the public. Register at sicksystem.eventbrite.com.
Jayme Fraser is a reporter for the Malheur Enterprise. She’s spending the year examining the way states manage people with mental illnesses who commit violent crimes — in Oregon and nationally. Are there problems with the way your state handles people who are violent and have mental illnesses? Email her at jayme@malheurenterprise.com and follow her on Twitter @JaymeKFraser.
 

Pro Publica Thisthenewarticlestart
A ProPublica and Malheur Enterprise Forum Asks: What Happens When People Found “Guilty Except for Insanity” Attack Again?

Nov. 14, 10:44 a.m. EST
This year, the Malheur Enterprise and ProPublica have examined how Oregon allows people charged with serious crimes, who were found “guilty except for insanity,” to be released from the state psychiatric hospital or supervised community programs. After reviewing the records of people set free by the state’s Psychiatric Security Review Board from Jan. 1, 2008, and Oct. 15, 2015, Malheur Enterprise reporter Jayme Fraser found that in almost 35 percent of those cases, people were charged with new crimes within three years.
“The Consequences of a Sick System,” a community forum on Nov. 29 at the Four Rivers Cultural Center in Ontario, Oregon, will explore how this has continued to happen across the state. Featuring a panel of experts including Enterprise reporters, state health representatives and mental health advocates, the discussion will cover the history of Oregon’s unique emphasis on reintegrating criminally insane defendants into the community and address questions on topics such as:
How frequently a person found criminally insane commits another crime after leaving state supervision
How the state decides how someone is safe for release
Why the state has released people even in the face of warnings they were dangerous
What changes might better protect the public without sacrificing the rights of people with mental illness
The issue hits close to home for the Ontario community, which has been gripped by the high-profile case of Anthony Montwheeler, who was convicted of kidnapping his ex-wife and child in 1997, released from the hospital in 2017, and, four weeks later, murdered his ex-wife and a motorist in a stabbing and car crash.
The expert panel — including Fraser and Enterprise publisher Les Zaitz, moderated by ProPublica Editor-in-Chief Stephen Engelberg — will also take questions from audience members seeking answers about “guilty except for insanity” policies. Additional speakers to be announced.

 Thursday, Nov. 29  Doors open at 6 p.m., program starts at 6:30 p.m.  Four Rivers Cultural Center  676 SW 5th Ave.  Ontario, OR   Refreshments will be provided.  Register at sicksystem.eventbrite.com  Contact: Cynthia Gordy Giwa, cynthia.giwa@propublica.org
 
